## Socioeconomic centers in cities worldwide

Urban centers serve as engines of regional development, yet accurately defining and identifying the socioeconomic centers of cities globally remains a big challenge. Existing mapping efforts are often limited to large cities in developed regions and rely on data sources that are unavailable in many developing countries. This data scarcity hinders the establishment of consistent urban indicators, such as accessibility, to assess progress towards the United Nations Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). Here, we develop and validate a global map of the socioeconomic centers of cities for 2020 by integrating nighttime light and population density data within an advanced geospatial modeling framework. Our analysis reveals that monocentric cities -- the standard urban model -- still dominate our planet, accounting for over 80\% of cities worldwide. However, these monocentric cities encompass only approximately 20\% of the total urbanized area, urban population, and nighttime light intensity; this 80/20 pattern underscores significant disparities in urban development. Further analysis, combined with socioeconomic datasets, reveals a marked difference between developed and developing regions: high-income countries exhibit greater polycentricity than low-income countries, demonstrating a positive correlation between urban sprawl and economic growth. Our global dataset and findings provide critical insights into urban structure and development, with important implications for urban planning, policymaking, and the formulation of indicators for urban sustainability assessment.
